[Invest as an engineer]

This is a draft of what I will say at the lightning talk for East Agile on Monday 5 April 2025.

When I was in my teenage years, my older sister once told me: the government will proactively weaken money buying power over time. That's the way they push people to work, to avoid stagnation. That was what taught at the Finance course of University, and was also the origin of my awareness about "investing".

Fast forward to 2020, when I made my first money via an internship. I continued my knowledge of "investing" in the form: "My hard-earned money will lose its value over time, so what should I exchange my money for, to avoid this problem". The trend back then was crypto and stock (this was right before the Covid hits, at the peak of both the Crypto and Stock market hype). So I went for both, some on Binance Crypto, some on Index and Mutual funds. Which turned out to be a very good learning experience about buying at the peak.

I was a senior student at the time, I was novice in investing, but not in learning. When I hear people say: you have to "learn" to invest, I put my learning hat on. People were idealizing Warren Buffett, and Benjamin Graham. So I read about "value investing principles" from these 2. I understood the essence, I tried to practice some examples, but I did not emphathize. What the 2 investors did, to optimize their investments was: to read financial reports, apply statistical analysis and emotional control. Then put a price on the companies or assets, buy the ones that are undervalued, to later sell at a higher price. Which for me felt too much hassle, and too little resonance. Besides, the overarching theme was: "You will mostly not beat the market average, so you better off not putting in too much work, and just trust the index fund anyway".

Then, I came across the legendary startup investor Sam Altman (then later Paul Graham, Ron Conway, Peter Thiel) with a much different way of determining the future. The idea is: Engineers are supposed to be believers and makers of the future. They should be confident and absolute about the future. They can be wrong in the details, so it's important to be confident and flexible. But they have to have strong belief, regardless of how bad the situation currently is. Because they can, and should, create the future.

What does that have to do with investing? Two things:
- Investing is predicting the future, and engineers should predict the future in a definite fashion with reasoning, and empathizing. Not estimating with statistical analysis.
- Investing requires bravery to go against the crowd, and put your money in your high conviction bets for a very long time. And engineers should be brave.

You should learn about price hype cycle, every chart of price in an open market will follow some Sine wave. Hype cycle comes in the form of rumble. We are living in a time of abundance of information and intelligence, so it is very easy to detect where the crowd is heading to. When the press is mentioning so much about something, and people around you are also mentioning that; you know they are overpriced. An example is the 2 hype cycles of Crypto price in March 2021 and January 2025, where if you remember, people were all over the place talking about Crypto, and the press was very excited, conveniently right before its significant drop in 2022.

Is the inverse of this phenomenon when things are underpriced? Well... yes and no. It is true that when nobody is talking about something, that thing is likely to be underpriced. But the catch is only if it has real value, otherwise it is a fraud. This is where you have to be brave and not be too intelligent, to detect things with underpriced intrinsic value and go agaisnt the crowd. You have to resort to thinking from first principle a lot of times, and trust your conviction until proven correct.

Learning about hype cycles helps you take advantage of when prices are low. In an open market you can only determine when prices are low, you can't determine the true price of anything. Even the maker of the Mona Lisa art can't put a true price on his painting. Though, he can put the total cost of his work: how much did he spend for the materials and the time it took for him to paint. The act of publishing financial reports in a business is similar to putting the costs of a painting in the open. The problem is it takes too much effort detecting the lies in these reports. The finance profession, to a certain level, developed the skills to lie on this financial report. You can't blame the profession, if you start measuring something, that thing will inevitably be hacked.

Then how else to distinguish between fraud and real businesses/assets? Every business has some level of fraud. What to determine then, is what kind of business will thrive regardless of how bad the execution qualities are. What business has so much need and leverage to give leeway for fraud. The engineering way is to stay close to your profession, stay close to what you use. As a user, you have a very good sense of whether the product you use will make a good business. For example, if you use the internet daily, and find yourself using it increasingly as AI emerges, it is a very good idea to bet on internet infrastructure companies. If you can make sense of your judgement and other people (especially the press) don't see the same thing, that's a good sign. You should trust your intuition of product. The same way kids are very good preditor of the future, just ask them what they love and be surprised by what the future entails.

You don't have to limit investing to just the stock market, anything your instinct says to put money on, you should. Find small bets that wins you 100x if right and lose you 1x if wrong, then bet more in that direction when you start seeing results, for example: invest on studying courses, or your significant other. The idea is to not think too much about money making, think about value generating and develop a good taste about what is genuienly beneficial for the world. Funnily enough, investing as an engineer to a certain degree needs not to be greedy, and a little bit of romance.

