[Transcend by simplify]
AI is here and it's accelerating the workforce. And gradually people realize what used to be fast is now slow. This is not the first time acceleration happens. Acceleration has always been happening throughout the history of technical evolution. From broadcasting power of the internet, software delivery speed of browsers, abstractions and utilities of programming languages, mini computer and now to AI. Every event horizon happens and people are doubtful but never want to look back.

There is an important skill transfer throughout technical revolutions: simplification. When you describe what you want to happen in simple terms, you are already half way to making it happen, and embracing the technology pushes the the other half. Another surprising thing with simplification: Important problems appear when we simplify the problem statement. When adjacent problems combined, the definition of the problem becomes simpler, a higher abstraction level. Bigger problems are harder, but defined shorter.

This phenomenon becomes more apparent when AI standardizes the solution for existing problems. Every published golden standard get indexed, and answered when asked. But AI doesn't combine adjacent problems, not when it is tasked to solve problems. So we now need to do the combination and connect the dots ourselves. When adjacent problems are solved, the next step is to transcend: solve bigger problem by carefully combine and select the solutions. Like a step up in the ever increasing size of problem solved.

So now we can have a new goal to aim for: To be more productive in the age of AI, we can try to simplify the definition of our goal as much as we can. We used to work in a divide and concur manner. But as AI becoming more capable, it is beneficial to consider the reverse: transcend by connecting the dots and simplify the goal definition.

Usually we divide and concur to solve preset problem. But simplify and connect comes subconsciously and does not happen much in restrained settings, it happens when we try to push the boundary of excellence. The solution may come so surprising that people would be in doubts. This is where human has to be brave in the genre of AI. We need to say things that AI is not expected to say, or ask AI questions we aren't expected to ask to win bigger prizes. Is it possible? Perhaps. Is it necessary? Absolutely.
